---
layout: post
title: "Problem 031: Coin Sums"
date: 2020-12-28 12:36:46 +0100
tags: euler
---
{% include mathjax.html %}
## Problem
In the United Kingdom the currency is made up of pound (£) and pence (p). There are eight coins in general circulation: 1p, 2p, 5p, 10p, 20p, 50p, £1 (100p), and £2 (200p).

It is possible to make £2 in the following way:
\\\[1 \times £1 + 1 \times 50p + 2 \times 20p + 1 \times 5p + 1 \times 2p + 3 \times 1p\\\]

How many different ways can £2 be made using any number of coins?

## Solution

This is a typical "coin DP" problem. Given $N$ distinct types of coins with values $c_1, c_2, \cdots, c_N$, how many ways can we make $M$ units of money?

To solve this problem, it is best to first solve some related subproblems. 

Let $f(n, m)$ be the number of ways to make $m$ units of money using coins with values $c_1, \cdots, c_n$ only, where $1 \leq n \leq N$ and $0 \leq m \leq M$. 

Consider the base case where $n=1$. When there is only one type of coin, there is at most one way of making $m$ units of money. It is impossible to make $m$ if $m$ is not divisible by $n$. Hence:
\\\[ 
    f(1,m) = 
    \begin{cases}
    1 &\text{if } n \mid m\\\\ 
    0 &\text{otherwise}
    \end{cases} 
\\\]

Now consider the case where $n=2$. To make $m$, you can first make this decision:
1. I will not use coin $c_2$ to make $m$.
1. I will use coin $c_2$ to make $m$. (Only applicable when $c_2 \leq m$)

If decision 1 is made, there are exactly $f(1, m)$ ways to make $m$. 

If decision 2 is made, there are exactly $f(2, m - c_2)$ ways to make $m$. 

*Why?* You might think. Consider the ways to make $m - c_2$ units of money using $c_1, c_2$. By adding a $c_2$ coin to all of those individual combinations, you can get all the ways to make $m$ using at least one $c_2$ coin.

Therefore, the following recurrence relation holds:
\\\[ 
    f(2,m) = 
    \begin{cases}
    f(1,m) + f(2, m-c_2) &\text{if } c_2 \leq m\\\\ 
    f(1,m) &\text{otherwise}
    \end{cases} 
\\\]

Using similar reasons, the following recurrence relation holds for general $n, m$:
\\\[ 
    f(n,m) = 
    \begin{cases}
    f(n-1,m) + f(n, m-c_n) &\text{if } c_n \leq m\\\\ 
    f(n-1,m) &\text{otherwise}
    \end{cases} 
\\\]

Now that the recurrence relation is determined, it is not hard to compute $f(N, M)$ - the solution of the problem with a program.
{% highlight python %}
COINS = [1, 2, 5, 10, 20, 50, 100, 200]
VALUE = 200

DP = [[0 for _ in range(VALUE + 1)] for _ in range(len(COINS))]
for i in range(len(COINS)):
    coin_value = COINS[i]
    for value in range(VALUE + 1):
        if i == 0:
            DP[i][value] = 1 if value % coin_value == 0 else 0
        else:
            DP[i][value] = DP[i-1][value]
            if coin_value <= value:
                DP[i][value] += DP[i][value - coin_value]
    
print(f'There are {DP[len(COINS) - 1][VALUE]} way(s) to make {VALUE}p')
{% endhighlight %}